Baby Name Popularity Model
==========================

See the final report [here](report/report.pdf).

About
-----


This is the repository for the work involved in Harvard's Fall 2018 Applied Math
115: Mathematical Modeling first project. It details the modeling process
alongside numerical experiments and theoretical work.

The project aims to model the evolution of baby name popularity over time in the
United States. The explicit aims are to 

1. Create a stylized model which fits baby names trends reasonably well through
   which to understand what drives baby name trends.
2. To potentially be able to use such a model for prediction of future baby name
   popularity.

Contributers
------------

- [Francisco Rivera](mailto:frivera@college.harvard.edu)
- Mark Chamberlain

Literature
----------
- Drift as a mechanism for cultural change: an example from baby names
  - <http://rspb.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/royprsb/270/Suppl_1/S120.full.pdf>
- From Karen to Katie: Using Baby Names to Understand Cultural Evolution
  - <http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/0956797612443371>
- Analyses of baby name popularity distribution in U.S. for the last 131 years
  - <https://doi.org/10.1002/cplx.21409>
- How adoption speed affects the abandonment of cultural tastes
  - <http://www.pnas.org/content/106/20/8146>


Work Log
--------

### Wednesday Oct 24

Francisco and Mark met at office hours to settle on a topic idea. The search was
motivated by availability of data as well as transferability of models we have
seen in class. They arrived at baby names as a rich source of data for which
diffusion models could be applicable.

### Thursday Oct 25

Francisco and Mark presented the [initial slideshow](slide-show.md) of the
project. Through the Q&A, there were a couple of take-aways,

- The importance of interpretability when constructing the model.
- A potential consideration of competition among names "taking share" from each
  other.
- Simplifications when thinking about the topology of the United States
  (adjacency network, east-west dimension, north-south dimension, etc)

### Sunday Oct 28

Francisco read through Hahn and Bentley (2003), understanding their random
imitation model and using it to

1. performing algebraic analysis on its implications for variance over time
2. confirming these analyses by running numerical simulations that contrast
   possible paths of name popularity this model predicts vs what we observe.

Both analyses concur that this model is insufficient to explain the boom-bust
cycles that we observe in name popularity over time.

### Saturday Nov 4

Francisco started the write-up including sketching out the outline and writing
up some of the stylized facts being taken away from inspection of the data.

Data Source
-----------

The data for this project comes from <https://data.gov>. The data files are not
checked into the repository, and can be pulled from the following links.

- [National baby data](https://catalog.data.gov/dataset/baby-names-from-social-security-card-applications-national-level-data)
- [State baby data](https://catalog.data.gov/dataset/baby-names-from-social-security-card-applications-data-by-state-and-district-of-)

The transformed data files are stored in the `data/` directory, generated by the
[Data Exploration](01-data-exploration.ipynb) notebook.

Notebooks
---------

- [Data Exploration](01-FR-data-exploration.ipynb) houses the initial
  data-reading code for national name data. It reads from the raw data files to
  create curated aggregations, and visualizes some of the data's trends.

- [Imitation Model](02-FR-imitation-model.ipynb) explores the Hahn and Bentley
  (2003) model as a null hypothesis for trend evolution, finding that the
  variance predicted is too small to explain the boom of popular names.

- [In-Group Imitation](03-FR-ingroup-imitation.ipynb) looks at a model of
  imitation with a segmented population into a desirable "in"-group and an
  imitating "out"-group.

- [Prediction Problem](04-FR-prediction-problem.ipynb) treats this problem as an
  AR time series model to get a benchmark for the predictability of the data
  without using any model structure

To-dos
------

[ ] Write up algebraic analysis for imitation model (Mark will do)

[ ] Perform likelihood test for imitation model (Francisco will do)

[ ] Write up the motivation for the in/out-group  model (Mark will do)

[ ] Perform likelihood test for in/out-group model (Francisco will do)

[x] Perform likelihood test for predictive baseline (done, Francisco)

[ ] Think about geo-spatial extensions (potential get to)
